	The life as a college student is not easy, there are lots of trials and struggles that we have to face and surpass.
Especially when you took up engineering courses in Bohol Island State University Main Campus, you really have to be strong 
and hardworking in order for you to survive and pass all your subjects. Taking up 5 year course in college, is difficult, 
especially when you take up Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering. Hard work, dedication, perseverance, inspiration, 
and love in your course are what you need. There is no year or semester that you can feel relax in BISU, the life there is 
very tough. There are lots of projects that you have to pass on time, lots of sleepless nights, quizzes and major exams that 
you have to pass, and most specially, instructors that are very terror and hard to deal with. Just like this semester, I can 
say that, it is one of the most tiring semesters that I have experience in my college life. I have 7 subjects this semester 
and majority of it are major subjects, including, software engineering, numerical analysis, principles of communication, linux, 
elective, and trouble shooting of computer systems. Software Engineering as well as Elective, handled by Mr. Uy, is one of the 
hardest subjects this semester, because it is a project base subject. In this subjects, we need to look for a client and propose
our project to the instructor, and it is up to him if he well accept it, or reject it. And in order for us to pass this subject 
we have to pass our project on time. Another one is, Principles of Communication and Linux Operating System, handled by Mr. Anuta. 
In this subject, you will also experience sleepless nights because of the quizzes and major exams. You have to listen carefully 
during discussion and study hard in order for you to pass this subject. And when you are given assignments, and project by the 
instructor, you also have to pass it on time. We also have Numerical Analysis, handled by Mr. Lauron, and it is obviously a math
subject. I can say that, it is not a hard subject, unlike our other math subjects. You just have to listen and take down notes 
every discussion and study hard whenever there’s a quiz or major exam. When you are given a project, you also have to pass it on 
time. And lastly, is the trouble shooting of computer system which is handled by Mr. Perin. In this subject, we were paired into 
16 pairs and each pair was given topics to be reported in the class. Me and my partner, is the 9th reporter, and we have to report 
the topic about SCSI or the Small Computer System Interface. We are also asked to make a slideshow of our topic and explain it in 
front of the class. That is why, me and my partner felt a little bit nervous and scared because we have no idea about our topic. 
So what we did is, we research it and share each other’s idea, that’s why we finished our report nicely. On the day of our reporting, 
honestly, I felt very nervous because I’m afraid that I can’t explain it clearly to our classmates and I know that it will be our 
own classmates who will give us grades and it will be base in our reporting and how we explain our topics. Good thing is, my partner 
helped me a lot, that’s why we received good grades from our classmates. After all the pairs finished their reports, we are asked 
to study all the 16 topics because we will have an exam. After all the reporting activity and major exam for the midterm, our instructor
divide our class into two groups and gave us two quizzes for the finals, regarding troubleshooting.  At first, we were given raspberry 
pi and our task is to troubleshoot it, but the raspberry pi works properly when we tried it. Second is, we were given a system unit 
and we were given a task to troubleshoot it, so we troubleshoot it. After the quizzes, our instructor grouped us again and gave us 
topics that we have to research, compile and pass on time. Lastly, our instructor wants us to send the answers in our quizzes at 
github.com, that is why we make an account in github and send our answers. Our experience in our troubleshooting subject is not also
easy, but, it is fun. Even though we didn’t meet our expectations in this subject, we have still learned and discover new things, 
just like the Baybayin. Becasue this is the only subject that uses baybin. I can still remember our midterm exam in this subject, 
it was written in baybayin even the front page of our paper, it was in baybayin. There was also a part in our exam that was written 
in babayin that we have to translate and answer. All of us got shock upon seeing our test papers because it was our first time that 
we encounter baybayin and we have no knowledge about it. But, despite that hardship, still, we were able to answer that exam. I really
expect a lot in this subject, I thought that we can experience troubleshooting the hardware of the computer, we can  experience 
assembling and disassembling it, and  we will have more knowledge about it just like the higher year students. But still, we’ve enjoyed 
it and learned from this subject. I know that our instructor, Mr. Perin, did his best to teach us well. I also understand that Mr. Perin
is new in teaching profession. But, Mr. Perin is cool, understanding, and approachable, we can even chitchat with him inside the class,
and we can laugh with him. He is not like the other instructors, he don’t pressure us, he don’t give us lot of hard requirements, and 
he understand our side as a student. That’s why all of us are very thankful to him because even though we have terror instructors 
Mr. Perin is still there who is willing to understand us.
	We all know that studying is not really easy, you need to have patience, perseverance, hard work and dedication. You just have
to study hard for you to achieve your goals and dream in life. I know that where I am right now, whatever I am facing right now is not
just an accident. I know that God is using this situation to shape and prepare me for the place He wants to bring me into tomorrow. 
I know that this is just a part of challenges in life. And I really believe that, before you experience success, you really have to 
work hard for it. There is purpose in every trial, storm, battle and hardship. We just have to trust Him with His plan even if we don’t
understand it. And don’t give up when life is tough.
